Probe Set Design for Oligonucleotide Fingerprinting of Ribosomal rRNA Genes (OFRG)

OFRG is a hybridization based method for grouping similar rRNA genes. The probes are
sequentially hybridized to an array of environmentally derived bacterial rRNA genes and
the hybridization pattern of each probe to each gene on the array becomes that genes'
fingerprint. Fingerprints can then be clustered using various methods, and the clusters
represent putative taxonomic groupings of bacteria.



Instructions for setting up and running Probe Set Design scripts

Requirements:

1) A Windows machine is required to run the first script. A linux machine (or Cygwin)
	is required to run best_probes.o (via makeprobes.pl), the probe set design program.
	All other scripts can be run on Windows or Linux.

2) The Perl programming language must be installed. Testing was done with
	Perl 5.12.3 on Windows and Perl 5.10.1 on Linux, but will probably work 
	with other versions.

3) Perl modules required:
	Win32::IEAutomation (on Windows only)
	Config::Tiny
	Bio::SeqIO

4) IMPORTANT: replace the original WinClicker.pm that comes with IEAutomation with the
	modified version that comes in this zip file, as it has additional functionality
	required by the rdp_downloader.pl script.

5) If you are using a 64-bit machine you may need to download the 64-bit
	version of AutoIt v3. Navigate to the IEAutomation folder and replace
	the AutoItX3.dll with the 64-bit version. Be sure to rename the
	64-bit .dll file to "AutoItX3.dll".

6) MOTHUR must be installed. Download from http://www.mothur.org/. The executable will
	need to be placed in the directory "d_distances" after that directory has been
	created by the script "d_column_distances.pl".

7) best_probes.o must be compiled on your machine. The source code is in best_probes.tar
	and the executable should be in the same directory as the perl scripts.

8) An account must be set up on the Ribosomal Database Project's (RDP) website:
	http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/. (Masked fasta files are not available for download without
	an account).



The scripts should all be placed in the same subdirectory and must be run in the following order:

1) rdp_downloader.pl
2) remove_variable_regions.pl
3) remove_duplicate_sequences.pl
4) column_distance.pl
5) column_distance_qsub.pl (optional)
6) column_distance_merge.pl (optional)
7) column_distance_sort.pl
8) makenamefiles.pl
9) makeotus.pl
10) training_seqs_maker.pl
11) sequences2matrix_by_otu.pl
12) makeprobes.pl


Other notes:

The names of the scripts, as well as the default folder names, have been prepended with letters 
from a-i, so as to keep them better organized and easier to start from the command line.

The scripts use one of two configuration files (probeset.conf, rdp_downloader.conf), 
which contain various parameters that can be changed when desired. More detailed information 
about the parameters can be found in the configuration files themselves. Intermediate 
directories will be created as the scripts are run.

View the headers of the Perl scripts for a description of what each script does.

#rdp_downloader.pl
This script must be run on a Windows machine, as it uses the Perl module Win32::IEAutomation 
to interact with the Ribosomal Database Project's (RDP) website. Downloading the sequences 
takes approximately 12-24 hours, if all goes well, but there may be glitches that require 
restarting the script.

Should it be necessary to restart, parameters are available in the rdp_downloader.conf file
that allow restarting at a specified genus. Use the screen output and/or files already
downloaded to determine where to start. The phylum for any genus must also be specified.

Note that your RDP username and password must be added to the configuation file.

#column_distance_qsub.pl
The largest files can take days to process. If you have access to a cluster running Torque,
this script will break the task into jobs and automatically submit them via the qsub command.

#makeotus.pl
Place a copy of the mothur executable into the directory holding the distance matrices
(default name is d_distances) before running makeotus.pl but after running column_distance.pl, 
as the d_distances directory is created by it. Optionally, you may create the directory
yourself and place the mothur progam in it even before the distance matrices are made.

The directory "a_maskedfastas" is pre-loaded with a few sample files for the tutorial. It 
is recommended that you go through the whole tutorial before downloading sequences from RDP, as
files will be added to this directory and make the tutorial much slower.



